So what happens then,
if in the next line of code,
I changed the value of level and
I change it to error.
And so
now I'm trying to really weary the user,
you've made a terrible mistake
you shouldn't have done this.
I still get a warning.
Even if I changed level, I still get
a warning when I call where a user.
And this is a similar issue to why earlier
we were still getting the same values for
the position of our beautiful clock.
Even when we were running the callback
function over and over again.
So what's going on here?
It all comes down to scope.
So in JavaScript,
[LAUGH] as in most programming
languages that we would
find ourselves using,
there are essentially a variety of,
we could think of them as
contexts called scopes,
where JavaScript knows what
you mean when you say a thing.
For example, it knows what value
I'm referring to when I say level,
only because I declared it
earlier in my global scope.
And so we talked about this a little
bit in JavaScript first steps so
might be worth a look.
But I like the metaphor of a limousine for
JavaScript scopes, and
we can just refresh our memories of
like how Scope works in JavaScript.
Let's move over to the,
whoa, let's move over [LAUGH] to
the virtual whiteboard, shall we?
Okay, so we've got our,
when we're in a particular window or
what have you, we have our kind of global,
I hope you can read what passes for
handwriting.
We have our global scope, right,
where I can do things like maybe
I've declared like level is a thing.
And that points to some value over
on the heap, right, we now know.
So level points to some value that's like,
well,
I guess, I should have used,
yeah, okay, so it's warn.
Then I have a function,
and what did I call it?
Makelogger.
And inside of this function, JavaScript
create, or when I declare this function,
JavaScript in the body of that function
has sort of moved into another scope.
And I like the limo metaphor for
this because basically makelogger,
whoa okay,
can see outside of its scope to
the level variable that I declared.
So if I call level in here,
it's still going to be the same
value that's declared in the global scope.
I can actually access that value.
Whereas if I declare another variable,
like, that's hard to read,
let's say I do a cons new
var equals blah blah blah,
and then after defining my
function in the global scope,
I try to access new var,
it's not gonna happen.
So imagine you're in like a stretch
limo when you're in this function.
You can see out the tinted glass,
but nobody can see in to you and
whatever life of luxury
you're living there.
[LAUGH] So this is sort of this
concept of these nested scopes,
where a function can access things
that don't just exist in its scope.
Becomes very important when
we think about when and
where JavaScript is looking for
these values.
So to go back to our whiteboard when
I instead of declaring a new variable,
I have declared some makelogger function.
And that's going to return a function,
actually we've got another
little scope nest, hello, okay.
That's gonna be, sorry,
this is the log function.
And this function within a function
can also access what's in
both the makelogger scope and
what's in the global scope.
This function that I'm declaring,
In here within the makelager function,
we've got kind of like a limo within
a limo within [LAUGH] a limo.
So the metaphor breaks down, but
[LAUGH] the idea is again
like we have access to other
scopes than the one that
we're in when we're inside.
Not necessarily when we're outside,
well, not when we're outside,
we can't see into somebody else's scope.
But the fact that we can see
out means that the values and
the decisions,
that we're gonna be making inside
of this inner function
might be based on values
as they were in the scope
where we defined it.
So let's look at this.
So, okay,
we have level in the global scope.
We then call makeLogger
with this value level.
So now, makeLogger, in its little scope,
it declares a new variable, log level,
that's defined by, this is created by the
way JavaScript function declarations work.
We can just declare the variable right
there as an argument in the middle of
the parentheses.
So now I have access to the variable log
level within the makeLogger function.
For example, if I wanted to put
a console log here before returning,
I could, and level would be warn.
But also, that value gets referenced when
this log function is
defined in order to look
up the given string as a method
on the console object.
So what's happening is that
when this function runs,
let's go back to the whiteboard.
Clean this up a little bit, okay.
[COUGH] So this was called,
I don't know,
log level was another variable in here.
And that points to whatever was level
before, cuz that's the value we passed in,
which then ultimately points
us back to this string warn.
Pretend that's an arrow,
[LAUGH] and the log function
then is going to say,
okay, I am now a function.
Where I'm trying to do console and
then whatever log level is and so
this is where it's like okay what is the
value of log level let me go look for it.
I found it eventually through a series of
pointers now I'm gonna replace
this value in here and
the function that's returned
is pointing to that value.
Even if I later change it down
here in the global scope,
If I change it over here, this is
just gonna repoint this variable and
not change anything about this
function that was already created and
stored as its very own object on the heap.
Okay, so I fill out a very chaotic arrows.
But the point here is that, We
can essentially remember data from
the context in which this particular,
in this case function, was declared.
But regardless,
when I looked up this value level,
later renamed to log level,
and I got that value, and
then I used that value in the code
that I then stored as a function
returned as a value,
which I could then later call.
That string,
because here we're dealing with a string
gets remembered even after
level has long changed.
So where user is remembering
something that's
kind of stuck in time at
whatever it referenced
when it was first running
through its code,
which needed to reference values that
were pointed to by certain variables.
So this is all to say, essentially,
what we have is Jurassic Park and
a value of our little warn string trapped
like a mosquito in the metaphorical
amber of this function value that was
returned from the parent function.
So we can put aside the fact
that this may not have any
scientific accuracy of how mosquitos and
dinosaurs work.
Shockingly, the Jurassic Park was
a non-fiction film, but anyway [LAUGH].
The idea here is that we can trap things
inside of a function that we have passed
back out of a parent function as a value.
And that is, to add some more jargon
on us, a concept called closure.
So while the words
are sometimes used differently,
a bit like essentially what we're saying
is that this worry user function,
this internal log function,
the internal log function that
is the value that I'm getting back when
I call my mmakeLogger has closed over.
Or sort of it is encased
in amber the value
from the scope where it was defined.
So not the value in the global scope
as many times as it may change but
the value that was pointed to
by that variable in the global
scope at the time that this
inner function was declared.
And it doesn't have to just be
something from the global scope.
It could also be a variable declared
within the parent function or
within the parent of a grandparent or
what have you.
So any of those outer scopes
that the limo can see out to,
the infinite nested limo,
the Russian doll of limos,
if you will, can be closed over and
trapped in amber and
remembered for
the lifetime of that function itself.
Okay, so this is a little bit of scope
review that we have different scopes.
It's also a bit of this is why we
need to remember that if we want
a new random value we have to
call it in the right place.
Or if we want to not call a random
value too many different times,
we can also declare it or
get that value in a higher scope and
then pull it down into our little
ambery nugget of a closure.